README.md, before:

# Walkthru Data

**Think: Homebrew for Open Data Pipelines**

A package manager for discovering, installing, and querying open datasets. Each "tap" extracts data from public sources (APIs, satellites, surveys) and publishes versioned snapshots to S3 with DuckLake catalogs.

## Quick Start

```bash
# Install CLI
pip install walkthru-data

# Search for datasets
walkthru search "real estate"

# Install a tap
walkthru install re01

# Query data
walkthru query re01 "SELECT * FROM data WHERE year = 2025 LIMIT 10"

# Time travel
walkthru query re01@20251101 "SELECT COUNT(*) FROM data"
```

## Available Taps

| ID | Name | Category | Update | Records |
|----|------|----------|--------|---------|
| [re01](taps/re01/) | Nawy Real Estate Data | Real Estate | Monthly | ~1,200 |

## Architecture

```
walkthru-data/
├── taps/              # Dataset definitions (like Homebrew formulae)
│   └── re01/          # Short ID: Real Estate #01
│       ├── tap.yaml   # Manifest
│       ├── extract.sql # DuckDB extraction script
│       └── catalog.db  # DuckLake version history
│
├── registry/          # Central discovery
│   ├── registry.db    # Searchable catalog
│   └── taps.json      # Index
│
├── cli/               # CLI tool
│   └── walkthru_data/
│
└── .github/workflows/ # Automated extraction
```

## S3 Storage

All data published to S3-compatible object storage:

```
s3://walkthru-earth/
├── re01/                    # Nawy real estate
│   ├── catalog.db           # DuckLake catalog
│   └── country=EGY/
│       └── year=2025/
│           └── month=11/
│               └── data.parquet
│
└── _registry/
    └── registry.db          # Central catalog
```

## Tap ID System

Format: `{category}{number}`

**Categories**:
- `re` - Real estate
- `cl` - Climate
- `dm` - Demographics
- `st` - Satellite
- `tr` - Transit
- `en` - Environment
- `if` - Infrastructure

**Examples**: `re01`, `cl01`, `dm01`, `st01`

## Contributing a Tap

```bash
# 1. Create tap structure
./scripts/create-tap.sh re02 "My Real Estate Data"

# 2. Edit manifest
cd taps/re02
vim tap.yaml

# 3. Write extraction
vim extract.sql

# 4. Test locally
walkthru tap test re02

# 5. Submit PR
git add taps/re02/
git commit -m "Add re02: My Real Estate Data"
git push origin add-re02
```

See [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for details.

## Features

✅ **Short IDs**: `re01` vs `real-estate-nawy-data`
✅ **Version history**: DuckLake catalogs track all snapshots
✅ **Time travel**: Query any historical snapshot
✅ **Auto-generated workflows**: From tap.yaml manifest
✅ **CLI tool**: Like Homebrew (`brew install`)
✅ **Searchable registry**: Find datasets quickly
✅ **Hive partitioning**: Efficient queries
✅ **Open formats**: Parquet, GeoParquet

## Technology

- **Table Format**: DuckLake (SQL-based lakehouse)
- **Query Engine**: DuckDB
- **Storage**: S3-compatible object storage
- **Compression**: Parquet with ZSTD
- **Catalogs**: SQLite per-tap + central PostgreSQL (optional)
- **CI/CD**: GitHub Actions + Hetzner Cloud runners

## Infrastructure

- **Runners**: Self-hosted on Hetzner Cloud (~98% cheaper than GitHub)
- **Storage**: S3-compatible (Hetzner Object Storage)
- **Cost**: ~$73/month for 100 datasets, 1TB storage

## Documentation

- [Architecture Overview](docs/ARCHITECTURE.md)
- [Tap Manifest Format](docs/TAP_MANIFEST.md)
- [CLI Reference](docs/CLI.md)
- [Contributing Guide](CONTRIBUTING.md)
- [Roadmap](ROADMAP.md)

## License

MIT - Data subject to original sources' terms

## Credits

Built by [Walkthru Earth](https://walkthru.earth)

Inspired by:
- [Homebrew](https://brew.sh/) - Package manager
- [conda-forge](https://conda-forge.org/) - Community recipes
- [DuckDB](https://duckdb.org/) - Analytics engine
- [DuckLake](https://ducklake.select/) - Lakehouse format

Commit message:

Add GitHub Secrets documentation
- Created SECRETS.md with complete setup guide
- Documents 4 required secrets for workflows:
  * PERSONAL_ACCESS_TOKEN (GitHub runner creation)
  * HCLOUD_TOKEN (Hetzner Cloud API)
  * OBJECTSTORAGE_API_KEY (S3 access key)
  * OBJECTSTORAGE_API_SECRET (S3 secret key)
- Includes troubleshooting and security best practices
- Updated README.md to reference SECRETS.md in Infrastructure section
- Cleaned up README.md references per user feedback

README.md, after:

# Walkthru Data

Open data pipeline infrastructure for discovering, installing, and querying public datasets. Each "tap" extracts data from public sources (APIs, satellites, surveys) and publishes versioned snapshots to S3 with DuckLake catalogs.

## Quick Start

```bash
# Install CLI
pip install walkthru-data

# Search for datasets
walkthru search "real estate"

# Install a tap
walkthru install re01

# Query data
walkthru query re01 "SELECT * FROM data WHERE year = 2025 LIMIT 10"

# Time travel
walkthru query re01@20251101 "SELECT COUNT(*) FROM data"
```

## Available Taps

| ID | Name | Category | Update | Records |
|----|------|----------|--------|---------|
| [re01](taps/re01/) | Nawy Real Estate Data | Real Estate | Monthly | ~1,200 |

## Architecture

```
walkthru-data/
├── taps/              # Dataset definitions
│   └── re01/          # Short ID: Real Estate #01
│       ├── tap.yaml   # Manifest
│       ├── extract.sql # DuckDB extraction script
│       └── catalog.db  # DuckLake version history
│
├── registry/          # Central discovery
│   ├── registry.db    # Searchable catalog
│   └── taps.json      # Index
│
├── cli/               # CLI tool
│   └── walkthru_data/
│
└── .github/workflows/ # Automated extraction
```

## S3 Storage

All data published to S3-compatible object storage:

```
s3://walkthru-earth/
├── re01/                    # Nawy real estate
│   ├── catalog.db           # DuckLake catalog
│   └── country=EGY/
│       └── year=2025/
│           └── month=11/
│               └── data.parquet
│
└── _registry/
    └── registry.db          # Central catalog
```

## Tap ID System

Format: `{category}{number}`

**Categories**:
- `re` - Real estate
- `cl` - Climate
- `dm` - Demographics
- `st` - Satellite
- `tr` - Transit
- `en` - Environment
- `if` - Infrastructure

**Examples**: `re01`, `cl01`, `dm01`, `st01`

## Contributing a Tap

```bash
# 1. Create tap structure
./scripts/create-tap.sh re02 "My Real Estate Data"

# 2. Edit manifest
cd taps/re02
vim tap.yaml

# 3. Write extraction
vim extract.sql

# 4. Test locally
walkthru tap test re02

# 5. Submit PR
git add taps/re02/
git commit -m "Add re02: My Real Estate Data"
git push origin add-re02
```

See [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for details.

## Features

✅ **Short IDs**: `re01` vs `real-estate-nawy-data`
✅ **Version history**: DuckLake catalogs track all snapshots
✅ **Time travel**: Query any historical snapshot
✅ **Auto-generated workflows**: From tap.yaml manifest
✅ **CLI tool**: Install and query datasets
✅ **Searchable registry**: Find datasets quickly
✅ **Hive partitioning**: Efficient queries
✅ **Open formats**: Parquet, GeoParquet

## Technology

- **Table Format**: DuckLake (SQL-based lakehouse)
- **Query Engine**: DuckDB
- **Storage**: S3-compatible object storage
- **Compression**: Parquet with ZSTD
- **Catalogs**: SQLite per-tap + central PostgreSQL (optional)
- **CI/CD**: GitHub Actions + Hetzner Cloud runners

## Infrastructure

- **Runners**: Self-hosted on Hetzner Cloud (~98% cheaper than GitHub)
- **Storage**: S3-compatible (Hetzner Object Storage)
- **Cost**: ~$73/month for 100 datasets, 1TB storage
- **Setup**: See [SECRETS.md](SECRETS.md) for required GitHub secrets configuration

## Documentation

- [Architecture Overview](docs/ARCHITECTURE.md)
- [Tap Manifest Format](docs/TAP_MANIFEST.md)
- [CLI Reference](docs/CLI.md)
- [Contributing Guide](CONTRIBUTING.md)
- [Roadmap](ROADMAP.md)

## License

MIT - Data subject to original sources' terms

## Credits

Built by [Walkthru Earth](https://walkthru.earth)

Powered by:
- [DuckDB](https://duckdb.org/) - Analytics engine
- [DuckLake](https://ducklake.select/) - Lakehouse format
- [Hetzner Cloud](https://www.hetzner.com/cloud) - Infrastructure
